FEMALE STUDENT：Professor Jennings? I hope I’m not interrupting, but you wanted to see me?

MALE PROFESSOR：Oh, hello, Suzanne. Yes, yes, come right in. How’re you doing?

FEMALE STUDENT：Alright.

MALE PROFESSOR：Well, good. The reason I wanted to talk to you was that while you were presenting your linguistics project in class the other day… well, you know, I was thinking, you’re a perfect candidate for the Dean’s Undergraduate Research Fund.

FEMALE STUDENT：Um, professor, I’m not really sure what the uh… Dean’s…

MALE PROFESSOR：Undergraduate Research Fund is? It is a mouthful, I suppose.  OK, here’s the thing, every year the school has a pool of money to fund a number of research projects of undergraduate students because, as you can imagine, in-depth research often requires monetary support.

FEMALE STUDENT：I would like to expand on my research…

MALE PROFESSOR：Good. First a panel of professors reviews the applications for the grant, and then they decide on which research projects should be funded. The allotted money can be used for travel expenses—to attend a conference, for example—or for things like supplies, research equipment… resources that are necessary to conduct the research.

FEMALE STUDENT：I see…

MALE PROFESSOR：Right. And I think you should apply for this grant. Your project is definitely eligible. And you could expand it if you had the necessary resources. So, does it sound like something you’d be interested in?

FEMALE STUDENT：Oh yeah, it sounds great. I thought the topic I worked on was really interesting. And it’s certainly relevant to my linguistics major. I assume it would also look good when I try to get into graduate school. But how do I apply for the grant?

MALE PROFESSOR：It’s pretty straightforward. A brief description of your proposed project, and an estimated budget—how much you’d need to spend and what you intend to spend it on. Also, a glowing letter of recommendation from a linguistics professor wouldn’t hurt, which I’d be more than happy to write up for you.

FEMALE STUDENT：OK, cool. I’m pretty clear on how to carry out my project, but I’m not sure where I can find more information on the subject…

MALE PROFESSOR：Well, I’ve already thought of that. There’s this private library at a university in Boston—by the way, because I graduated from that school, I can get you access to it, no problem—see, the library houses lots of unpublished documents that are relevant to your topic.

FEMALE STUDENT：So I could put that in the application for the grant… that I plan on using material from that library for my research, and figure a trip to Boston into my budget?

MALE PROFESSOR：Exactly. I really think, judging from your work in class, and the relevance and clarity of this project, you really have a good chance of getting the funding.

FEMALE STUDENT：OK, I’ll definitely apply then.

MALE PROFESSOR：Well, sooner the better. It's due in the few weeks. Good luck, and I’ll get that letter written up right away.

