Student: So, I was wondering what I could do to improve my paper before the final draft is due.

Professor: Well, Michael, I have no problem with your writing style. It’s graceful and clear. Eh, and it’s interesting that you are writing about your grandmother’s piano concert.

Student: Yeah, when you said we had to attend a concert and write about it, I immediately thought of her. I have been to lots of her concerts. So I am really familiar with her music.

Professor: That’s not necessarily an advantage. Familiarity sometimes makes it hard to see things objectively.

Student: So I shouldn’t write about my grandmother?

Professor: No, no, no. I am just talking in general. But as I mentioned in my comments, I’d like you to place your grandmother’s concert in… in a broader context.

Student: Yeah, I saw that, but I wasn’t sure what you meant. I mean, I mentioned my grandmother’s childhood, how much her parents love music, how she played the piano at all our family gatherings.

Professor: Ok. I see what happened now. By broader context, I mean how the concert relates to some period in music history.

Student: I see. Ok. Um… I have an idea.

Professor: Ok.

Student: Well, as you read in my paper, my grandmother performs classical music.

Professor: Yes.

Student: That’s her true love. But for most of her career, she performed jazz. She originally studied to be a classical pianist. But jazz was in its heyday back then, and when she got out of the conservatory, she was invited to join a jazz orchestra. And the opportunity was just too good to turn down.

Professor: Really. Well, that’s fascinating. Because she probably had to reinvent her whole musical style.

Student: She did. But jazz was where the money was at that time, at least for her.

Professor: But she eventually went back to classical?

Student: Right. But only recently.

Professor: Ok.

Student: So if I can show how her choices relate to what was happening in the world of music at the time…?

Professor: I think that might work very nicely.

Student: And if I do that, I guess I’ll have to like, interview her.

Professor: Right.

Student: And I guess that would mean…

Professor: You’ll have to rewrite most of your paper.

Student: Ouch!

Professor: Yeah. Would an extra week ease the pain?

Student: Definitely.

Professor: Ok. So are there other musicians in your family?

Student: Yeah. My mother plays piano, too. Not as well as my grandmother, but…

Professor: And you?

Student: I don’t play any instruments, but I sing in the university choir. In fact, we are performing next week, and I have a solo.

Professor: That’s great! Could I tell the class about your concert?

Student: Um…sure. But…about my paper… what question should I be asking my grandmother?

Professor: You know what, I have a meeting now. Why don’t you come to class a few minutes early tomorrow?

Student: Will do. 

