W: Hi, I’m Melissa! I was just a few doors down getting some help in the computer lab. My electronic files won’t open. The technician says it’s probably a computer virus. She’s working on it now.

M: Yes, from what I’ve heard lots of campus computers of been affected. What a first week ha?

W: I know! Anyhow, I noticed your name on the door as I was walking down the hallway, thought I’d stop in and find out if you happen to have any additional copies of the class syllabus. The one I received in class the other day is missing a page.

M: Oh, sorry about that. I probably have a few extra print outs on hand.

W: Great! Oh, and I noticed on the syllabus we will be learning about and eventually writing a paper on the Bauhaus style of art? Sounds interesting! I’m looking forward to it.

M: Right, but technically it doesn’t say Bauhaus style of art, it only says the Bauhaus. W: Oh, what’s the difference?

M: Well, the Bauhaus is not really an artistic style like cubism. It was the name of an art and design school in Germany in the early 20th century. The Bauhaus was started as an experiment in education, and one groundbreaking technique used in its teaching was that students actively participated in workshops, instead of just sitting in classes.

W: Interesting! I don’t have much background in order or anything. I’m in economics major and I’m taking this class as an elective, decided I wanted to broaden my awareness. Try something new. M: Excellent! I’m really glad to hear that!

W: So, was the focus of the Bauhaus architecture? I mean I’ve studied German and Bauhaus translates into house for building.

M: Well, the founding director was an architect. However, he aim to combine an incredibly broad variety of fine arts and crafts under one artistic Ruth. As matter of fact, when the Bauhaus house first open, it was without an architectural department for several years. But later it became very influential in architecture.

W: So I wasn’t all wrong.

M: You’ll see on the syllables that you are required to visit the Rutherford museum exhibit. The exhibit will help you see that there is no single Bauhaus style. I think it’s refreshing that this particular exhibit departs from the standard ways, which are from the Bauhaus is often presented. W: Which are?

M: Well, for example, by specific artist, I think it’s a mistake to focus on a single Bauhaus artist, and that person’s individual specialty. I mean, the different artist from the school created different things. Fabrics, sculpture, furniture, graphic design, paintings, even theatrical performances. The exhibit in the Rutherford museum units all these specialties through connecting themes, such as motion or the body.

W: Sounds fascinating! Say, I’ve heard something about discount nights at that museum?

M: Weekends are full price. It’s typically best to go Thursday nights. That’s student discount night, fifty percent off. However, next Wednesday is open to the public for free, it’s a special promotion. So, I know what I do.