
I’m sure that you all have been to museum where you’ve seen beautiful white marble statues sculpted by the Greeks and Romans, or you’ve least seen the photos of such sculptures, all right? We’ve come to expect these classical Greek and Roman statues to be monochrome, just one color: white skin, white hair, white eyes, white everything. The natural color of the marble they are carved from. Now, the idea of plane white sculpture goes back to 15th century Europe, when renaissance artists rediscovered the ancient Greek and Roman culture. They were inspired by sculptures that appeared monochrome, so they created white marble statues. The impact of these renaissance statues such as Michelangelo’s David, gave rise to new standard for sculpture, standard that emphasized form rather than color.

But what if many of those ancient statues were originally polychrome, colored from head to toe. Early in the 19th century archeologists found traces of paint on ancient sculptures. And since then, classical art historians have begun to realize that Greek and Roman marble sculptures were originally colored. Even if the ancient marble sculpture doesn’t have any visible traces of paint, that does not mean it was originally monochrome. In many cases, the pigment would have simply deteriorated. Ancient artists used mineral based paints with organic binding media that would be disintegrated on its own over time. In other cases, the pigment may had been weathered away while it’s exposed to the elements. Or someone may have recklessly clean the statues and unknowingly removed the last traces of pigment. So, the fact is we do have evidences of polychrome sculptures from Greece and Rome from the 17th century B.C.E. all the way through at least the third or fourth century C.E.

It’s now generally accepted that most maybe even all marble sculptures from that time period received some kind of surface treatment like the applications of pigments, colored stones, or metals that would modified their color. So, do we interpret the statue differently if we know it had originally been polychrome? I felt strongly when it comes to this: a marble sculpture that had been colored has another a layer of meaning that was meant to affect the viewer.

As art historians, we must try to interpret the intensions of the artists, what were the artists trying to achieve. Certain features of these sculptures were highlighted through color were made to standout. In other words, they caused the viewers to focus on certain features. And certain colors represent certain things to the ancient artists and cultures, a color might symbolized heroism, divinity or youth. One of the example to consider is the statue of Roman emperor Augustus. This particular statue of Augustus that I’m referring to was discovered just outside the Rome in 1863, and was in terrific condition. It’s about 2 meters tall, just larger than life-size. It was made from expensive high quality type of marble, and was obviously carved by an expert.

Now, it’s still had visible traces of color on the hair, eyes and its clothing and armor. The paint has been very carefully studied and it turns out that the colors weren’t just from any pigments. They were from expensive pigments. The use of these pigments showed the importance of Augustus and he should be honored. And let’s consider the extensive traces of red pigment that was found the statue’s cloak. The cloaks are special garment that was traditional worn by the emperor on the battle field. And in real life was red color, which to the Romans signified the emperor’s authority, military and political authority.

OK, I won’t point out any further details about the colors on the Augustus’s statue, because you can already begin to see that there was culturally important associated with the colors. Symbolism which should help us understand the status better. There are many many more sculptures that have traces of pigments left on them. And we have the technology these days to be able to carry out effective study of these pigments. There is a lot of work to be done. But it means to be done fast. Like I said before, these pigments deteriorate rapidly, so we really need to do the research before the traces are gone. So that we can increase our understanding of ancient polychrome sculptures and the cultures which created them.