Professor

When you try to imagine a fungus, you probably picture a mushroom popping out of the ground, and think that's it. But a fungus like that...most of it actually lives underground. And fungi in general are often an important active component of soil. A fungus secrets enzyme into the soil, enzymes that break down, decompose organic material in the soil. So the fungus can absorb this material and get nutrition. But to me, what's most interesting about this process is how it may enable fungi to clean up environmental pollution in the soil. And that's sinks impart to a substance in their cell walls called chitin.

Now, a lot of people think fungi are related to plants, but they are not. Believe it or not, the only other place chitin is found in abundance is in the exoskeleton of insects, crabs and such. So in this sense, fungi are more associated with insects than with any plant. Strange, huh? And the chitin in the cell walls of the filamentous fungus...a filament, of course, is a long, thread-like structure, seal-straight and end. Filamentous fungi grow in soil and indicated vegetation. And, as their name implies, they exist as filaments.

And although regarded as microorganisms, filaments from a single fungus can fan out to occupy many square meters or even several square kilometers of forest floor. Their vast surface area allows them to break down and taking huge amount of nutrients. But beyond that, the filaments also pull out of the soil a great deal of the pollution that might be in there, especially heavy metals. And here's what chitin comes in: like other substances in fungal cell's walls, chitin forms strong chemical bounds to heavy metal in the environment, in a process we call adsorption. Now don't confuse this with absorption, where substances absorb into a cell into the interior of the cell. I mean, that's happening here, too.

But adsorption means binding to the outer space of the cell, and a filamentous fungus can adsorb toxic heavy metals, bind them into the surface of its enormous network of filaments. And thereby detoxify a large soil ecosystem. The heavy metals are still there, but instead of leaching into the water system and contaminate the water underground, large amount of this metals may remain bound to the chitin to the cell walls of filaments fungi in the soil. And thus remain chemical inactive for as long as thirty years. Perhaps longer. In fact, we can actually use the cell walls of filamentous fungi as a filter, even after the fungi are dead. For example, the pharmaceutical industry grows filamentous fungi in large quantities in the lab, like, to produce the antibiotic penicillin, the drug company grows the fungus penicillin.

And after the penicillin is extracted, these dead penicillin filaments, we can use the chitin in their cell walls to make industrial filters to adsorb heavy metals. We can put these filters into waste pipes from industrial process and use the filters to trap heavy metals, like mercury and zine. Later, we can chemically extract the heavy metal and reuse the filter over and over. Now, going back to the adsorption of toxic metals into the body of the fungus, let's turn our attention to mushrooms. Like other fungi, mushrooms can adsorb large quantities of heavy metals. In fact, they may contain up to two and half times the concentration of toxic metals found in the soil they grow in. So mushrooms, at least what we see above the ground, we can potentially harvest them and then once in for all safely dispose the pollutants contained within them. In fact, to clean up, especially the groundwater system permanently, harvesting mushrooms is probably the best way to go. For some reason, this hasn't happened yet as far as I know. But I can easily invasion cultivating mushrooms for the sole purpose for the detoxifying a large underground ecosystem.

