And that arrives our discussion of how the retail sector weighs in which retail managers deal with customers’ complaints. So, let’s shift now to the service sector, which marks not goods but services, intangibles, like its transportation, food service, career consoling, oh, there are literally hundreds of examples. Service providers must of course constantly strive to meet customers’ needs. But, as in retail, their instances of service failure in which the customers dissatisfied, perhaps to the point not doing business with you anymore. Some service failures are beyond our organization and control, like computer mail function that leads to miss-deadlines. Other failures step from process problems, like inadequate training for newly hired employees. And there’s human error, um, ok, imagining you manage a car rental agency, a customer calls in a reservation, but your employee marks down the wrong date, so your customer arrives and guess what? The size car he reserved isn’t available. But your customer is less concerned about this source of the failure than the solution. What you do about it? What sort of compensation, what service recovery you give? So, if you’re in the service industry, as a marketer, you always need some kind of service recovery plan. Your plan must in place before failure occurs, and it must also be communicated promptly to everyone in your organization who deals with customers, so they will know what to do. Service recovery in compensates to all the actions taken to get disappointed customers back to, uh, back to, uh, well back to a state of satisfaction. So, if your car rental agency couldn’t provide the size car your customer wanted, but your policy is to provide a room in your car for the same price, your customer would probably be happy, might even restore his faith in your company. Research has in fact identified service recovery as a significant determinate of customer loyalty.

Stu: I see what you mean. Every year, my family goes on vacation together, and a few summers ago, when we are in Chicago, it was really really hot, and guess what? The hotel’s air-conditioning broken, everyone was complaining. What the hotel did? They actually didn’t charge anybody for that weekend. But the funny thing is, that even though we had that horrible experience in that hotel, because it was so quick to appease us, we usually stay at the same hotel every time we go to Chicago.

Pro: Great example! So, in this case, that hotel changed might consider itself the beneficiary of the so-called “service recovery paradox”. Um, the paradox basically implies that customers who experience a service failure, well, they could potentially be made more loyal than customers who were satisfied in the first place. If an adequate order recovery occurs after the failure. Yes, Ben? Student 1: Wait a minute. If a good service recovery creates more loyalty than, uh, if things move smoothly from the get-go, why don’t companies like…make mistakes on purpose, so…

Pro: So you could implement recovery plan that leave your customers delighted as supposed to merely satisfied? Look, it’s always better to do things right the first time, cause how, how can you know that paradox will hold true in every situation? Plus, it’s hard to predict if a good service recovery will overcome the negative effects of service failure. And what about all those failures that never comes to your attention, because statistically, about 50% of customers don’t complain about service failures, at least not to the service provider. But negative word of mouth, now that’s got worse implications for your business. Also, it has pay to your employees to execute the service a second time. Typically, a service recovery is gone involve some kind of compensation, right? So, it’s going to cost your company some money that you’re going to have to account for in your budget. I’ve there actually been researching some of these issues myself, cause what we need is a deeper understanding of customers’ thought processes and their reactions to service recoveries. How do consumers form expectations? How do they react to different service recoveries? Can we predict how any given customers will react to a given service failure? People’s expectations, their priorities vary, like if I’m in a hurry, the French fries I ordered at the fast food restaurant aren’t piping hot, I might not complain, cause I got them fast, but if I’m not in a hurry, I might return the fries even I have to wait for a fresh batch.

